---
layout: post
title: "Understanding Problems with AI Assistance"
date: 2026-03-18
categories: ai
---
In my last blog post, I talked about how a deep understanding of a problem is required to come up with a great solution. With that in mind, I'll discuss how I use AI to understand problems better in my day-to-day work.

For reference purposes, I currently work at a company called Wistia where I build a web app for recording. In the process of building Wistia's Record product, I also occasionally work on other features like Wistia's online video editor and webinar solution. I recently went on parental leave for 4 months because I had a son. When I returned from leave, a really tricky problem about video animations was thrown my way. When I tackle a complex feature like this, I usually start by understanding the ask. After that, I spike out what I think will be the hardest parts so that I run into any major issues sooner rather than later. The spike will inform a technical spec and the finalized implementation.

Understanding the ask is usually pretty straightforward and doesn't really involve much AI work at all. I have a conversation with my product manager and any relevant business partners. I usually ask questions that help me understand the requirements for the feature at hand. I also ask about any near-term improvements that we plan to make. These conversations guide my thinking about the problem and how I am going to solve it.

Once I understand the ask, I usually build a spike for the parts of the feature that I think may be complicated or have difficult edge cases. Sniffing out complications is a skill I have developed over time as I have gained domain knowledge. Before I start writing any code myself or with an AI accomplice, I spend time reading any existing relevant code. In this particular case, I needed to add animations to our recording product to match what our live product shows when feeds are toggled or change position on the stage. I spent a lot of time reading the CSS code for the stage to understand the animation timings and properties that were changed. I also spent time reading code in the record product to understand what changed to our video rendering while I was out on leave.

AI is really good at explaining code for the most part. The Claude Code VSCode extension is great for ad hoc questions about the file you have open or specific snippets of code. If I encounter something that doesn't make sense to me, I usually ask Claude to explain it. Claude is usually pretty good at explaining cryptic snippets of code. If you doubt the explanation, copy-pasting into ChatGPT or changing the model can give a little more confidence.

After I felt confident in my understanding of the pre-existing code, I asked myself "What is the ideal API for animating video feeds around the stage?". For any animation, you need a duration and the starting and ending values for properties that should be animated. I started fumbling my way through, and I eventually derived some type updates that I thought were good enough for the API I wanted. I wrote up a prompt that described the desired outcome and type updates, and I asked Claude to provide an implementation.

The initial result looked pretty good in the code, but it had a major bug where videos looked strange during animation. Claude had generated a lot of code, and I didn't completely understand all the details of the existing video operations. I spent a few hours reading the code and debugging. The API I am working with is a nested tree structure of video operations, and I realized that I needed to modify another operation to adjust the clipping of the video feeds during animation. I did try to ask Claude to fix its own mistake, but Claude was misguided as to where the actual issue was. After an hour or two, I finally got something that worked well. I had a video with a smooth animation that did what I wanted. I shared my first spike PR with others for review, and I got some much-needed feedback. I also realized that I made a fundamental mistake with my type updates.

While some may be dismayed by the mistakes, the good news is that prototypes are pretty cheap in this AI-enabled world. These failures I experienced helped me understand the problem better. I spent another day working on a better spike where I had a more consistent API. I spent more time writing a tree with more complicated animations that had multiple videos. I started to feel pretty good about my solution; however, I ran into yet another issue. The library we use for previewing these video operations loads videos shortly before they are needed. Animating one video at a time often worked fine, but rapidly loading several videos for a 200ms animation was causing a lot of buffering problems. Also, because of the high I/O over the network, there were FPS drops in the previewer. The good news was that these videos did actually render smoothly when processed by the rendering system. The video rendering system waits for the videos to load entirely and then plays the videos frame by frame which eliminates the buffering state issue.

Discovering this limitation sparked a conversation where I found out that Wistia's edit team was well-aware of network limitations. The edit team had decided for a different feature to limit the number of streams on stage to 2 or 3 to avoid hitting TCP limits (~6 concurrent requests per host in most browsers). 200ms is not a lot of time to load a video and seek to the spot where I needed to be, and I also found that there were often 6-9 TCP requests occurring in parallel which definitely hit that TCP limit. I am glad I encountered this problem sooner rather than later.

I took these learnings and documented them in my technical specification document. After reviewing with a few stakeholders, the solution for bypassing the TCP limit was to give a more limited functionality where we show a flattened, pre-rendered video in the editor when there are 3 or more feeds. It gives less flexibility for laying videos out on the screen; however, most recorded videos have less than 3 visible feeds.

I am still currently working on this feature at the time of this writing; however, all of this prep work has made the implementation of production-level code easier. My estimate of the work required to ship this feature is more accurate due to the spike work. My team and project stakeholders are also aware of the limitations up front, and we're not scrambling to hit an unrealistic deadline.

In the process of working on this feature, I gained a deep understanding of the problem which aided in solving it. I feel confident in my ability to ship improvements to what I am building, and I can debug it when it breaks because I understand it. The discovery process was made faster with AI tools like Claude. The spike may have taken me several days just a few years ago, but now it can be done in a few hours to a day for a moderately complex feature. Some problems can't be discovered until you build something and test it, and AI reduces the cost of gaining that knowledge. My boss watched me break down this gnarly problem, and he gave me this feedback:

> Anytime you take on a feature, you do an excellent job thinking through how it should be built and then following through with strong execution. Your thoughtfulness and attention to detail always show in the work you deliver.

If you're reading this and using AI tools to write code, my challenge to you is to go beyond blind vibe coding. Dig in to the problems you're solving and how you're solving them so that you can improve and debug the things you build. In my next post, I'll be talking about strategies to avoid AI slop.
